# Spotify's KPI and Experimentation

I started using Spotify 11 years ago. I always preferred it to radio applications such as Pandora because I like to have control over my playlist. However, when I first listened to my Discover Weekly playlist, it quickly became my favorite part of Spotify. This playlist is currently generated by an algorightm that analyzes a user's listening habits to create a personalized playlist of 30 songs they've likely never heard before. It was clear the more I listened to this playlist, the more Spotify learned my preferences. I have found a lot of songs and bands I love because of this playlist.

The yearly rewind is another of my favorite features. I spend the year thinking about what songs may pop up. I like seeing what my listening behaviors reveal about the year, and I almost always save the year in rewind playlists.

Initially, I was adding 1-2 songs per week from the Discover Weekly playlist. After several months of interacting with this playlist weekly, I added 3-5 songs per week from consecutive versions of this playlist on the best weeks. Now, it's a part of my weekly reset ritual to listen to my Discover Weekly playlist in full. If I am not vibing with a song by its chorus, I skip.


## 🧪 Experiment 1: Discover Weekly Skipping - A Playlist Tailoring Experiment

**Objective**: Some weeks the Discover Weekly recommendations are better than others. I would like to see if we can analyze the time a user spends listening to a song in order to see if we can provide better recommendations in consecutive weeks. If the user spends 10 seconds or less listening to a song before it is skipped, the algorithm will be less likely to recommend any similar songs in the future for a set amount of time. The longer a user spends listening to a song, the playlist will have a larger percentage of songs that similar to this in future versions of the playlist (with a few wild cards in to keep things "fresh"!).

**Null Hypothesis**:  Tailoring the amount of future recommendations based on songs that aren't skipped has no impact on whether a user returns to the Discover Weekly playlist each week

**Alternative Hypothesis**: Tailoring the amount of future recommendations based on skip time will encourage users to return to the Discover Weekly playlist next week

**Leading Metric**:  Number of users who visit the Discover Weekly playlist

**Lagging Metric**:  Increase in users that spend 1 hour and 20+ minutes listening to the Discover Weekly playlist each week for the month

**Test Cell Allocation**: 50%-50%

## 🧪 Experiment 2: Listening Party Previews - Limited Permission Experiment

**Objective**: I love being able to create a jam session with other Spotify listeners! However, this feature is only available to premium users. I would be interested if allowing non-premium users to join a jam session in a limited capacity would encourage more users to convert to premium. Non-premium users will be able to jam out to 1-5 songs before being prompted to sign up to premium to hear more.

**Null Hypothesis**:  Allowing non-premium users to listen in on jam sessions has no effect on whether or not the user will sign up for premium

**Alternative Hypothesis**: Allowing non-premium users to listen for 5 songs will make them more statistically more likely to continue the jam session by signing up for premium

**Leading Metric**:  Number of jam-session users

**Lagging Metric**:  Percentage of users who continue premium and jam sessions

**Test Cell Allocation**:

- 25% offered premium after 1 song
- 25% offered premium after 3 songs
- 25% offered premium after 5 songs
- 25% control

## 🧪 Experiment 3: Shuffle Overhaul - True Randomization

**Objective**: Sometimes, I'm just not feeling a song for 10+ songs in a row. Other times, it feels like the same 10 songs are playing even though shuffle is on. This is because it's not purely random, but it's based on a random sequence based on listening history, popularity, artist and gene distribution, and tempo and danceability. I'm curious to see if changing the method of shuffling will prompt people to hit that skip button less.

**Null Hypothesis**:  Changing the shuffling method has no statistically significant change on whether the user chooses to hit skip more than once at a time in between songs

**Alternative Hypothesis**: Users will skip songs less often if the shuffle method is truly random

**Leading Metric**:  Users with "shuffle" consistently enabled

**Lagging Metric**:  Number of users with a low skip rate and shuffle enabled in future sessions

**Test Cell Allocation**: 50%-50%
